# cs1850final

This repo contains code for training/testing a CNN model for predicting gene expression from histone modifications and DNA sequences developed by Justin Sanders and Jordan Yang for the CS1850 final. For more information about our model and project, see our writeup.

The main code for our project is in histseq_model.py. The code is split int three main sections where the first loads the data, the second defines the model and training procedure, and the third calls the procedure to train the model and writes predictions to a file. Since the midterm, we have edited the first section to also read in the sequence data, we have changed architecture of the model defined in the second section, and added interpretation methods to the third section.

Within the code, the procedure train_model is where the model is defined and trained on the given data. This procedure takes an optional argument, testing_hyperparamaters, which indicates whether we are testing the effects of a change to the model (in which case we should run 5-fold cross validation to see how the validation loss behaves) or if we are wanting to make a final prediction to submit to Kaggle (in which case we want to train on all of the data). Currently, the code is set up to generate a submission to kaggle by calling train_model 3 times with testing_hyperparamaters=False, and averaging the results. If you wish to run an example of cross validation on our model, you can simply uncomment the call to train_model on line 337 where testing_hyperparamaters is set to True. At the end of the file there is also the code used to generate the histograms of gene expression and the code for running class based optimization and plotting the results. Additionally, after the model is trained the filter weights from the first CNN layer are saved to the file conv1_weights.npy. One can then use the procedure filter_weight_motifs() to print out a list of sequences generated by treating the filter weights as log-probabilities for each base pair. These sequences can then easily be turned into motifs by tools such as TomTom.

Our repo also contains the file hist_data_analysis.py which contains the code used to generate the MDS plots of Genes/Cells that we showed during our midterm presentation. However, we found that this analysis didn't amount to much, as no clear clustering was observed in the data.

Finally, our repo contains the file hist_model.py. This file contains our submission from the midterm.

---

# cs1850midterm (outdated)

This repo contains code for training/testing a CNN model for predicting gene expression from histone modifications developed by Justin Sanders and Jordan Yang for the CS1850 midterm. For more information about our model and project, see our writeup [here](https://docs.google.com/document/d/1nPeJzKdG1eufl7ixziazGgFKNXsO0ykny447kaIYqVk/edit?usp=sharing).

The main code for our project is in hist_model.py. It was developed to be run in coogle collab to take advantage of the GPUs they offer, and is thus split into three sections which are intended to be run as seperate blocks. The first section loads the data, the second section defines the model and training procedure, and the third section calls the procedure to train the model and writes predictions to a file. This way, the data doesn't need to be reprocessed with every run, saving time and memory stress. However, if you prefer the python file can be run all at once as well.

Within the code, the procedure train_model is where the model is defined and trained on the given data. This procedure takes an optional argument, testing_hyperparamaters, which indicates whether we are testing the effects of a change to the model (in which case we should run 10-fold cross validation to see how the validation loss behaves) or if we are wanting to make a final prediction to submit to Kaggle (in which case we want to train on all of the data). Currently, the code is set up to generate a submission to kaggle by calling train_model 10 times with testing_hyperparamaters=False, and averaging the results. If you wish to run an example of cross validation on our model, you can simply uncomment the call to train_model on line 196 where testing_hyperparamaters is set to True. At the end of the file there is also the code used to generate the histograms of gene expression that we showed in our report and presentation, which can be uncommented if you would like to reproduce those figures.


Our repo also contains the file hist_data_analysis.py which contains the code used to generate the MDS plots of Genes/Cells that we showed during our presentation. However, we found that this analysis didn't amount to much, as no clear clustering was observed in the data.

Finally, our repo contains the file histseq_model.py. This file contains an early version of our model that was designed to also use the sequence data which we made before the announcement that that was only for the final. Please just disregard it for now, as we're not sure if it works yet (it uses too much memory to test :( ) and we only include it in the repo so we can save our progress for the final.
